---
title: Do lawyers need Roman Law?
updated: 2017-02-22 16:35
---

In the rectorial speech by Theodor Mommsen and in Robert French’s address to the Australian Bar we can distinguish two kinds of arguments in favour of the practice of Roman Law: direct and indirect.

The direct arguments focus on the practical, contemporary use for the study of ancient legal systems, not necessarily at the bar itself. Mommsen argues that the grasp of the political organisation, institutions, jurisprudence, and law of an age in general comprise fundamental prerequisites of the study of history, on par only with the deep knowledge of a pertinent language. French, on the other hand, gives more gravity to a rather conservative argument in favour of historical approach to legal education – the argument from similarity. Most of the contemporary legal architectures draw their basic principles from the sources hundreds or thousands years away from now, and those sources can help shed some light on other nations’ rulings, for instance when intensified professional contacts are at stake, as well as on our own system. In demanding cases where the law in place does not allow to decide either way it is reasonable to resort to a tradition of the practice of law from which our own rules stem and which used to be widely discussed by the most illustrious minds of the past centuries.

The indirect argument is above all the one of the training ground. It says that we should study Roman Law as a way to explore how law is made and evaluated, what matters in its practice, how to make the statues unfold to reveal the intentions behind them, or how they can be creatively interpreted (sometimes turning their original meaning upside down) to face new societal challenges and keep the structure of the state intact. But this does not tell us why should not we do all that within our own legal framework? Why drag the ancient stuff into it and not focus on something more relevant to the contemporary world?

Precisely because it is not relevant to our world, would be my answer. The legal profession is full of people not interested in studying the complexities of law and discovering their often surprising consequences who choose instead to practice it by applying mere prejudice covered in professional mumbo jumbo. First years of legal education based solely on the abstract matters of ancient systems, where no emotional or political argument would be easy to use, can be a perfect way to verify the dedication of lawyers in spe to basic principles of thinking and argumentation, otherwise difficult to distill.
