---
title: Reasons behind philosophy's poor image
updated: 2016-02-14 12:00
---

*If you have ever had a slightest interest in philosophy, there is a strong chance you chose at least once not to share your passion. And if it turns out to be also your dream carreer, I guess you might have even lied about it couple of times. Probably you just grew tired of people sneering when you tell them what you study or quoting Stephen Hawking who pronounced your field long dead. If you find any of the above true, this post is for you.*

There is a question, usually neglected, everyone who has ever been significantly engaged in any discipline at some point needs to answer: what for? It would feel strange to start a philosophical blog without that question born in mind. Partly because of the nature of philosophical activity itself, foundations of which lay precisely in such a skeptic approach. But it is also a burning issue due to common contemporary reception of this field of research, resulting, in most cases either in utter underestimation of the subject of interest of philosophy, or in total refutation of philosophy in its entirety. For an aspiring philosopher, an attempt to provide a convincing (at least to oneself) response to those charges is a must.

Following considerations have been divided into two posts. Here, in the first part, I present what I believe to be the reasons behind the current position of philosophy as a discipline. Whilst the second part will be dedicated entirely to the primary issue of these investigations  —  the purpose of philosophy.

## But why is there even a problem?
Diminishing importance of other disciplines, or even exposing them as useless is no novelty in the academic world. It used to happen in the times long gone, it is happening now as well. Ancient rivalry between philosophy and theology was replaced in the 20th century with a vast campaign organised around *hard* sciences, especialy physics, aimed at universal reduction and unification of science and scholarship. Surprisingly, philosophy took a major part in that process, even though with hands of former or still practicing scientists, because of the Vienna Circle. Its members believed that philosophy apart from the so called *logic of science*, like normative ethics or metaphysics, could be at best listed among arts and brings no objective, decisive, nor valuable cognition whatsoever. Contemporary science probably has even less regard for philosopical research, as physics has been rising to the dignity of The Ultimate Discipline.

Those reductionist tendencies (often without much consideration) are surely strong and about to haunt us for a long time. Nevertheless, what should concern us more is the popular unsympathy towards philosophy — crucial for a position in the symbolic order of a community. It ranges far beyond the general contempt of humanities shared by the technicised society. If my intution is not yours in this respect, trust the general one  —  our language. A common phrase for silly, needless investigations over otherwise reputedly simple matters is one of our name  —  *to philosophise*. Or, following the online Oxford Dictionary, *to philosophise* is to “Speculate or theorize about fundamental or serious issues, **especially in a tedious or pompous way**”. “Explain or argue (an idea) in terms of one’s philosophical theories” comes further on as a possible second meaning of the word.

With this harsh perception of our field, the problem that needs to be tackled first is not of philosophy’s role. The primary question is why philosophy seems especially vulnerable to doubts concerning its purposefulness? The reason behind this proneness seems to me at least fivefold.

## One: tl;dr
There are yet too many possible explanations. Every serious philosopher, from Socrates to Wittgenstein, came up with his own systematic explanation of the purpose of philosophy. Even those who renounced the idea of a philosophical system, like the traditional skeptic school, or claimed to be the last in line, like Hegel. To choose between them (if that is even possible), one would have to get to know with them. It takes free time and effort, none of which is abundant.

Moreover, those propositions are neither complementary, nor interchangeable. Systems can never be reconciled — that feature on its own should not be a problem, just like different axiomatic sets in mathematics are no threat to mathematics as a whole. However, mathematics has a position strong enough not to mind potential doubts about its foundations. Conversely, it does not matter whether certain internal mathematical systems are useless, since its one *useful* (even though no one is really surehow) paradigm vouch for the value of the entire discipline.

Finally, admitting that the point of a discipline lies in the scope of the discipline in question is not a common academic practice. Very few scholars and scientists are willing to give in to such reflectiveness. Purposefulness of social activities, like research, is in fact a game of power: those who doubt, lose. In this framework, philosophy is doomed to be one huge loser.

## Two: ¬ [I ♥ Tests]
Philosophy is hardly verifiable and parametrized. Comparable tests of usefulness are a contemporary obsession, or — if you mind this emotional vocabulary — tendency, especially in the anglo-saxon world. Philosophy can never meet this demand, since every test requires indisputable acceptance of a given set of criteria, and it is philosophy’s ultimate principle not to take any criteria of reasoning for granted.

Test is one of the most anti-philosophical notions out there. As long as it comprises the core of the socio-economic reality, philosophy shall be belittled and disdained by the general public. This is also the case of humanities in general.

## Three: Not practical enough or...
Philosophy’s role is not socially obvious anymore, nor even defined satisfyingly enough to be acceptable, as in the case of sciences and humanistic scholarship. It seems a common belief that it simply does not meet the criterion of utility. So, for instance, science takes its rightful place in the firmament of human thought on account of direct, everyday applications of some of its findings and conclusions.

Undoubtedly, those simplified, pragmatic employments of scientific research did prove themselves capable of recasting our physical-world surroundings, as well as the inner goings-on of the entire civilization, and thus the ways of thinking of, probably, every single individual on the planet. But to say they comprise the core of scientific activity would be rather irresponsible. There are many areas destitute of any chance to comply with this prevalent, authoritarian prerequisite of narrow, material utility — like the theory of supersymmetry in physics, Riemann hypothesis in mathematics and many, many more issues absorbing huge efforts of the scientific community. In fact, the paramount portion of science has from tiny to none impact on the pragmatically measurable sphere of our lives. And yet there are few to urge to get rid of it.

Pragmatic (thanks to further engineering) employments of scientific research serve as a powerful business card for the scientific method and fields of investigation. But that is all they are, a representative, not the substance of science.

## Four: ...just the matter of $£$£$?
On the other hand, humane studies did manage to guarantee themselves a niche of acceptance, even though they lack strong practical background. They function somewhat on the verge of ridicule, because of their immanent uncashability, at least in a direct way. They are, however, tolerated. We may only guess why is that so, apart from the obvious reason, namely the remains of traditional position the humanistic approach still holds. But there is no use of that argument in our reflection on philosophy, since the latter did hold at least equally powerful position in the academic horizon.

One possible explanation of this advantage of other humanities over philosophy could be a lively attempt to involve them in the capitalistic production of value. Almost every humanistic and social discipline has managed to develop a business-oriented subbranch, or has been associated with a thematically related business activity, and thus secured its position in relation to market. Sociological statitisticians (or the other way round) survey the market, psychologists coach how to thrive in it and provide professional therapy to those who fail, philologists turn into copywriters, and the rest become marketing specialists, thanks to an ultrabroad offer of courses, modules and paths at every single faculty. Philosophy graduates are no different, many of them excel in corporate lives. However, philosophy as a discipline has not brought about its business-oriented representative, thus it could not gain market and society’s approval.

A straightaway counterexample one could give is the case of bioethics. Basically, it is a purely philosophical study, very practical and urgently needed. We do not need to stop there, though. There is also business ethics, pretty much monopolised by philosophers, and cognitive studies — slightly less philosophical, but rich with plenty of more easily verifiable, science-resembling and cashable applications. So how can that be a problem?

Unfortunately, the above examples are no real answer to the introduced problem. Both bioethics and business ethics *are* useful, but it is usefulness to the market that we have interest in, not any utility at all. And none of those is truly cashable, even worse — on the contrary. Bioethics and business ethics are more of an institutionally enforced impeder to the free-market activity. They are *socially* useful, but not at all so for business and reproduction of wealth. (Unless in dollars made by PR.)

As to cognitive studies, well… This one is a mess. First of all, the statements that these are still philosophy seem rather controversial. They most certainly aim at solving (or at least addressing) some philosophical problems, they even employ certain philosophical methods, but their criteria can hardly be called philosophical. They are too narrow, not independent enough from scientism and scientistic presuppositions. Cognitive studies seem more like a philosophical science, or *philosophising* science, perhaps even a scientific instantiation of philosophical enquiries  —  but philosophy? Nah, hardly so.

However, even if they were, that would be no satisfying answer to the problem of a business-oriented branch of philosophy. Cognitive studies would also strive to cash their main subjects of interest. Cognitivists, with their wide competence in psychology, IT, neural sciences and several other fields, can be sold — not cognitive studies.

## Five: Too bold to be beautiful
Last but not least, there comes the matter of ambitions. Humanities do not dare to (or perhaps are just clever enough not to) openly question the scientific and technical paradigm. Their representants, humanistic professors, are usually perfectly aware of the situation and do not hesitate to speak up. Therefore this is no accusation of cowardice. (Even though much can be done, for instance organised opposition against mindless parametrisation of universities, or an attempt to cut down marketing-oriented units in the faculties.) The point is that academics’ discontent may have very limited impact on proceedings in the disciplines they stand for. And when such influence is in fact exerted, in most cases its output turns out to be way too subtle for anyone to recognise. [^1]

This, however, is not the case of philosophy which, by its very nature, must systematically question all of its conscious presuppositions. It is philosophers’ duty to formulate claims opposing the leading paradigm, and to formulate them clearly, if only to accept it later on the grounds of argued reasoning. Doubts aimed at common sense, even formal, expressed for sake of the art, are an open declaration of war. No ideology could possibly embrace it, be it Vatican in the Renaissance or Hawking & Dawkins nowadays. Even though the latter at least care enough to discuss ideas instead of burning them.

## Conclusions
Philosophy’s image suffers from unparalleled in other fields possibility to define its own purpose. However, philosophy itself is not too different in terms of utility  —  and thus purpose  —  from any other academic discipline, either in humanities or *hard* science. Most of the scientific endeavour is not planned to be useful, and it rarely turns out to be so in the end. Nevertheless, on account of the general high regard for direct products of engineering, science stays symbolically strong.

Besides, philosophy is not and never will be suited for the test-based system of quality measurements. Also, it performs rather poorly in the new, market-oriented academic world. Purely pragmatic branches of humanistic studies were created as market-oriented business cards, vouching for acceptable position of the main discipline. Their existence did not follow from any intrinsic qualities of those areas, and thus influences only their popular reception, not actual purposefulnes.

Finally, philosophy’s greatest advantage is at the sime time its greatest peril. Even the most modest philosopher is bound to make daring claims, or at least use daring methods, since it is the first philosophical principle not to trust anything thoughtlessly. Philosophy has to question foundations of the system veryfiying its utility, and no hegemony likes to be questioned.

---
<small>
**List of footnotes** <br>
**1**:  A strongly expressed wariness towards capitalism is present in modern sociological writings. Nevertheless, I would not use it as a counterargument. First of all, the texts in question usually belong to the marxists tradition, of which there is not even an admitted belief whether it is a scholarship or not. Moreover, despite this open vigilance, sociology follows other rules of the market quite successfully; just to mention its role in market researches. <br>
Finally, even though it does stay alert to economic processes, there exists no organised and repetitive reflection on technical and scientific paradigm. On the contrary, those who tend to criticise market-based society often turn to purely technological world as a remedy. It looks like a dead end to me.
</small>

A slightly different version of this text was published under another title at [medium.com](https://medium.com/the-slingshot/in-defense-of-philosophy-1-state-of-affairs-b3e6e59cb17a).

[^1]:  A strongly expressed wariness towards capitalism is present in modern sociological writings. Nevertheless, I would not use it as a counterargument. First of all, the texts in question usually belong to the marxists tradition, of which there is not even an admitted belief whether it is a scholarship or not. Moreover, despite this open vigilance, sociology follows other rules of the market quite successfully; just to mention its role in market researches. Finally, even though it does stay alert to economic processes, there exists no organised and repetitive reflection on technical and scientific paradigm. On the contrary, those who tend to criticise market-based society often turn to purely technological world as a remedy. It looks like a dead end to me.
